---
layout: post
title: Redesign
---

After a round of the Olde Fashioned Cold-Combating Milkshake
Surprise&#0153;[^1] failed to alleviate my cold symptoms, the next step was
clear: it was time to overhaul my sorely neglected website. The first step was
scrapping my half-baked but nobly-intended blog platform,
[txture](https://github.com/jamesob/txture), god rest its soul, in lieu of a
more mature, Ruby-based platform called Jekyll.

### Let's talk about Jekyll

With txture, I had a few good ideas. I wanted raw-text storage of posts,
template-based generation of HTML, and the ability to use various web-swag, like
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link) and
[LESS](http://lesscss.org/), easily. After a few hours of hacking, I got
somewhere, but it was like setting out for New York City and ending up in
Newark. All augmentations beyond Markdown processing were implemented in my
kludgey hook framework and the page design was more hardwired than I would have
liked. Furthermore, txture's orthogonality was violated at the core: users would
be tied to Jetty, the web server bundled with Compojure, instead of being able
to use whatever web stack they prefer.

[Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/) delivers what I set out to write, and it does so
with the likeable sheen that is proverbial of big Ruby projects. A user simply
specifies HTML templates (which can be nested) and fills out a content
directory. Jekyll then renders a static version of the entire site to be
delivered by whatever server you prefer. This means that you can embed PHP code
in your Jekyll templates and have it interpreted by, say, Apache without Jekyll
knowing or caring. Orthogonal? Chya.

I won't get into Jekyll's setup and configuration too much since it's decently
detailed in [their docs](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki), but I will say
that within thirty minutes of issuing

    $ gem install jekyll

I had a very bare skeleton of this website. If you want to get a feel for
how Jekyll works, the code used to generate this site is hosted in its entirety
[on GitHub](https://github.com/jamesob/jamesob.jekyll), which brings me to my
next point.

### Version control: have you heard of it

This entire site is hosted on GitHub, which is awesome. I'll never lose any of
my stuff and I'll never have to deal with any of the \*SQLs.

Even better, this allows a great relationship between production and testing
environments. 

#### Hot-lava workflow

So I have a local copy of the [jamesob.jekyll
repository](https://github.com/jamesob/jamesob.jekyll) on my laptop, which is
where I do all of my development and writing. When I've made a change that I
like and I've tested everything locally with

    $ jekyll --server

I dish out

    $ git commit -a -m "added foobaz to the batcave"
    $ git push origin master

which throws my changes into GitHub. To update my actual website, all I have to
do is log into my server, pull down the changes from GitHub, and have Jekyll
regenerate the static pages.

    $ ssh job@secret-server-box
    job@secret-server-box$ cd jamesob.jekyll
    job@secret-server-box$ git pull origin master
    job@secret-server-box$ jekyll

And that's all there is to it: the changes are live. I have Jekyll set up to
drop the generated site into `/var/www`, where Apache will find it.

Let's say I want to make changes from my desktop; easy.

    job@desk$ git clone git@github.com:jamesob/jamesob.jekyll.git
    job@desk$ cd jamesob.jekyll
    [blog hard]
    job@desk$ git push origin master

Done.

### Party favors

* Jekyll renders posts based on file extension, so I can use Markdown simply by
  naming a post `foo.md`. If I want straight HTML, all it takes is `foo.html`.
* I use [less.js](http://fadeyev.net/2010/06/19/lessjs-will-obsolete-css/),
  which is a piece of JavaScript that interprets a LESS file and spits out CSS
  dynamically. LESS is a wrapper around CSS that makes stylesheeting bearable
  and... fun? It adds mixins, nesting, variables, and arithmetic. 
* [Disqus](http://disqus.com/) for comments.
* You'll notice that I use some fonts on this site that probably aren't
  installed on your system. I'm using CSS3's `@font-fact` syntax which allows me
  to use a font family that I have server-side.

### Brb finals

After a few hours of enjoyable toil, I have a system that makes writing nice.
The cold is abating, too.

[^1]: 12 oz. of mid-priced beer; 50 minutes of a late-70s, detective-based television
show; and 2 men's multivitamins. Mix vigorously.
