---
layout: post
title: Backing up personal data with Amazon's S3 and Duplicity
published: false
---

I have a lot data on my computer that I'd be very sad if I lost; I'm sure
most other people do, too.

While mirroring data across my own computers makes more sense than doing
nothing to guard against the loss of precious data, home backup doesn't make as 
much sense as storing my things off-site somewhere that does this type of 
operation more... professionally.

###Enter Amazon S3

Earlier this afternoon I began to scout around for someone to throw my data
at. Most of the sites I visited were hawking some GUI front-end for backup; I'm
not interested in that.

After <a href="http://searchyc.com/">searching Hacker News</a>, which is
usually the wise choice in situations like this, I found that most of the
commenters there used some sort of wrapper to backup directly to <b>Amazon's
S3</b> service. S3 charges <b>$0.15/GB/month</b> for storage and something like
<b>$0.10/GB</b> for transfer. 

Deal. I bought in immediately; getting into this, I figured there was a high
probability of me paying a flat rate for a fixed amount of storage, some of
which I wouldn't use, like a chump-sicle. This isn't the case with S3's pricing
model.

So, I registered <a href="http://aws.amazon.com/s3/">here</a>.

###Actually backing up

A common approach on Hacker News is to use <a
href="http://duplicity.nongnu.org/"> duplicity</a> in conjunction with S3. S3
provides the storage, duplicity does the actual transfer using credentials you
get from your S3 account. From the duplicity man page:

    Duplicity incrementally backs up files and directory by
    encrypting tar-format volumes with GnuPG and uploading them
    to a remote (or local) file server.  Currently local, ftp,
    ssh/scp, rsync, WebDAV, WebDAVs, HSi and Amazon S3 backends
    are available. Because duplicity uses librsync, the
    incremental archives are space efficient and only record the
    parts of files that have changed since the last backup.
    Currently duplicity supports deleted files, full Unix
    permissions, directories, symbolic links, fifos, etc., but
    not hard links.

I spent a little time fiddling around with building duplicity from source,
then eventually wised up [^1] and issued 

    $ sudo port install duplicity

After getting duplicity, I followed the <a
href="http://www.randys.org/2007/11/16/how-to-automated-backups-to-amazon-s-s3-with-duplicity/">
instructions here</a> to generate a gnugp key and put together a backup script.

Modifying the backup script listed above, I had to figure out which
directories I want actively stored on S3; I did so by calling tree on my home:

    $ sudo port install tree
    $ cd && tree -d -L 2 .</pre>

After looking at the cute tree printout, I modified the <span
class="inline-code">--exclude</span> and <span
class="inline-code">--include</span> arguments in the backup script accordingly.
For kicks, here's my modified backup script:

    #!/bin/bash
    # Export some ENV variables so you don't have to type anything
    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=[my aws access key]
    export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=[my aws secret key]
    export PASSPHRASE=[my gpg passphrase]

    GPG_KEY=[my gpg key]

    # The source of your backup
    SRC=[my home dir]

    # The destination
    # Note that the bucket need not exist
    # but does need to be unique amongst all
    # Amazon S3 users. So, choose wisely.
    DEST=s3+http://[my aws bucket name]

    tree -d -L 2 \
      ${SRC}/Music/iTunes/iTunes\ Media/Music/ \
      >${SRC}/music-list.txt

    duplicity \
      --encrypt-key=${GPG_KEY} \
      --sign-key=${GPG_KEY} \
      --include=${SRC}/.vim \
      --include=${SRC}/.vimrc \
      --include=${SRC}/Books \
      --include=${SRC}/Code \
      --include=${SRC}/Documents \
      --include=${SRC}/Journal \
      --include=${SRC}/Library \
      --include=${SRC}/Movies \
      --include=${SRC}/music-list.txt \
      --include=${SRC}/Pictures \
      --include=${SRC}/School \
      --include=${SRC}/bin \
      --exclude=${SRC}/** \
      ${SRC} ${DEST}

    rm ${SRC}/music-list.txt

    # Reset the ENV variables. Don't need them sitting around
    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=
    export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=
    export PASSPHRASE=

Notice I'm not backing up my music directory, but a tree-generated listing of
what music I have. The cost doubles when I store my music, so I figure when a
localized apocalypse hits northern Virginia and my family, loved ones, and I
are vacationing in San Francisco, I'll just torrent all the music I've bought.
Let the file-sharers back my collection up for me.

I did one initial sync, which took about a day. After the first sync, each
subsequent run only tracks changes, so future backups will be quick.

###Automating it

Time to edit the crontab, which will cause cron to automatically run the
incremental backup every so often.

    sudo crontab -e

This is what my crontab looks like

    #.---------------- minute (0 - 59) 
    #|   .------------- hour (0 - 23)
    #|   |   .---------- day of month (1 - 31)
    #|   |   |   .------- month (1 - 12) OR jan,feb,mar,apr ... 
    #|   |   |   |  .----- day of week (0 - 7) (Sunday=0 or 7)  OR
    #|   |   |   |  |       sun,mon,tue,wed,thu,fri,sat 
    #|   |   |   |  |
    #*   *   *   *  *  command to be executed
    0    20  *   *  * /Users/job/bin/dup-backup

This sets dup-backup to run every night at 8PM.

### Footnotes
[^1]: I keep forgetting that MacPorts exists.

