---
title: "Surprise, surprise: BoA and Fannie"
layout: post
published: true
---

From [a Rolling Stone
article](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/bank-of-america-too-crooked-to-fail-20120314?print=true)
on how Bank of America manipulates government to steal from the public:

> Another public lifeline is Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the giant, nationalized
> mortgage lenders. Need to make some cash? Toss a bunch of home loan
> applications onto a city street, then sell the resulting mortgages to Fannie
> and Freddie, which are basically a gigantic pile of public money guarded by
> second-rate managers. 
> 
> Just like the state pensions in Iowa and Maine and Mississippi, Fannie and
> Freddie were targeted for sales of toxic mortgages, and just like those
> entities, they have sued Bank of America, claiming they were suckered into
> buying more than $30 billion in shitty securities. But unlike those other
> suckers, Fannie and Freddie continued to buy crap loans from Bank of America
> even after it was clear they'd been hoodwinked. Last year, the bank
> created more than $156 billion in mortgages -- nearly $38 billion of which
> were bought by Fannie. Having the government as an ever-ready customer,
> standing by to buy mortgages at full retail prices, has always been an ongoing
> hidden bailout to the banks.


Were the government not in the business of securing mortgages and playing
favorites in the banking industry, this kind of manipulation and theft wouldn't
be possible. Privately-operated companies seeking profit don't buy securities
they know to be worthless.

Fannie and Freddie engage in this kind of nonsense because [there's no residual
claimant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons), which is the
case with every government agency.

