---
title: "Lisp: more is less"
layout: post
published: true
enable_comments: true
---

There's recently been a resurgence of interest in Lisp (specifically, Clojure)
in my neighborhood. I have some kind of a fondness for Lisp, but I think some
of its characteristics make it poorly suited for use in large programming
efforts. Indeed many of the unique properties that Lisp devotees (myself once
included) tout over other languages, like homoiconicity, make Lisp into an
unweidly, conceptual sledgehammer that's often out of scale with the problem
being solved.

## I liked Lisp

At some point in college, I began following a charismatic AI professor around
who was very knowledgeable and enthusiastic about Lisp. He described it in
a way that made it seems like some sort of remarkably powerful, higher
form of expression. So I dove in and started doing many of my projets in Common 
Lisp.

I eagerly read through ANSI Common Lisp, Practical Common Lisp, and
[SICP](http://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/); all great reads. I watched talks that
sold me on Rich Hickey's vision of how Clojure tackles modeling reality with
concurrency primitives. I wrote a [basic robot
driver](https://github.com/jamesob/create.clj) and a [shitty blog
framework](https://github.com/jamesob/txture) in Clojure. I strove to grok
code-as-data-data-as-code, metacircular evaluators, hygenic macros; the whole
enchilada.

And frankly, I got a lot of mileage out of that pursuit. SICP in particular
taught me a *ton* about good abstraction, programming structure, and
(unexpectedly) numerical analysis. Rich Hickey's talks are fascinating works of
thought, and they're engaging as hell. There is no shortage of entertaining
philosophical content in the Lisp community.

But that doesn't make Lisp an appropriate tool for large software projects.

## Remember "less is more?"

Lisps, for those unacquainted, have the unique property of
[homoiconicity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homoiconicity). This means,
among other things, that Lisps offer the ability to write very powerful
macros which put users on roughly even footing with language implementors.
In fact, most builtin functionality in Lisps are implemented as macros.

At first blush this may sound enticing, but it's actually a property that
gets progressively uglier as the number of active programmers goes up.

### Most programmers are not (nor should be) language designers

A smart programmer is not necessarily an empathetic language designer; they are
occupations that require different skillsets. Giving any programmer on your
team the ability to arbitrarily extend the compiler can lead to a bevy of
strange syntax and hard-to-debug idiosyncrasies.  Introducing macros increases
the conceptual surface area of a language by an unbounded amount, and it
defeats
[compactness](http://www.catb.org/esr/writings/taoup/html/ch04s02.html#compactness),
which I've seen is an important characteristic that aids programmers in quickly
and effectively understanding a code base.

Let me be clear: I think Lisp is more powerful language than, say, Python or
Java. That's what I'm arguing is its downfall. Using the simplest tool that
provides enough convenience to get a job done enjoyably (which Python often
does for me very nicely) has all kinds of peripheral benefits. Ones that
Lisp's power may exclude itself from, like...

### Goodbye, static analysis

One of the most helpful programming tools I've discovered in the past few years
has been in-editor static analysis tools, e.g. 
[syntastic](https://github.com/scrooloose/syntastic). Especially when 
developing in an interpreted language like Python, having syntactic 
analysis tools on hand to catch bugs before they happen and patrol code-quality
in CI builds is a massive boon.

With macros, or any form of extraordinary dynamic language abilities, many of
these benefits get thrown out the window. How can a static analysis tool keep
up with a language that's being arbitrarily extended at runtime? The prospect
is daunting. 

### Unix wisdom

Benefits like static analysis and compactness are consequences of using the
simplest thing that works with a reasonable amount of convenience. Obviously "a
reasonable amount" is tough to pin down and I won't attempt to do it here, but
suffice to say that the only convenience I see on the margin between a Lisp
and, say, Python, is a little bit of added syntactic sugar.

Projects like [Korma](http://sqlkorma.com/) sure look cool, and I'm sure are a
ball to write, but is there really such an advantage over something like
[sqlalchemy](http://www.sqlalchemy.org/) in terms of readability? An advantage
great enough to abandon automated sanity checks and to introduce obscure
macro-based stacktraces? I don't think so.

Perhaps it's possible to write a linter that is informed by macro definitions
within the codebase, but that's certainly a more challenging task than just
having to internalize a published language spec.


## Conceptual clutter

Popular Lisps these days seem to be, optimistically, more conceptually diverse
or, pessimistically, more conceptually undecided than other languages in 
popular usage. 

Unix is in part such an effective environment because its concepts are easy and
consistent. To see everything as a file, to work in terms of text streaming
through pipes; these are straightforward ideas that govern the entire system.
OOP is widely-used and easily comprehended because it is a fairly simple way of
modeling reality that is compatible with [how human beings do
it](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/41560220?uid=2&uid=4&sid=21103263638721).

By comparison, Common Lisp and Clojure (which rejects OOP but does, to its
credit, impose some generally useful frameworks, e.g. the `seq` interface) seem
to fall prey to the same affliction that I see in Haskell, Ruby, and Scala:
they give you varied and often overlapping options for how to model a certain
process or piece of state.

In Clojure, if I want to define a symbol there are [*nine different ways of
doing so*](http://clojure.org/vars). In Python, there are three (`=`, `def`,
`class`). By the way, those nine creational procedures only apply to `Vars`;
there are also `Refs`, `Agents`, and `Atoms` with their own assortment of
creation semantics; all of which are different primitive ways to reference
pieces of data in Clojure.

Clojure claims to include these language features as a way to mitigate the 
complexity of parallelism; frankly, I've never found threading or 
interprocess communication to be any sort of conceptual bottleneck while
working on some fairly complex distributed systems in Python.

### Simplicity buys a lot

I attribute a lot of Python's success to its devotion to simplicity; Python
wants the conceptual machinery for accomplishing a certain thing within the
language to be obvious and singular. This makes it easy for experienced Python
users to quickly grok foreign code, and it makes it easy for newbies to master
the language quickly. 

The relatively few conceptual mechanisms in Python may not cover every single
problem domain as well as picking the perfect one out in Clojure case-by-case,
but they *work well enough for most things* to be make Python a powerful
general-purpose programming language that is very effective at quickly
communicating systems to programmers.  This property is paramount in large
engineering efforts.

### Not all Lisps

This sort of excessive complexity isn't inherent in Lisps (certain types of
Scheme are wonderfully simple languages) but it does seem common to popular
variants.


## On the margin

On the margin, Lisp's additional power over other common languages like Python
and Java doesn't buy much practical benefit. It does, however, impose
significant costs in terms of programmer comprehension, code complexity, and
automated tooling like static analysis.

I believe in Lisp and its communities as worthwhile resources and valuable
for personal intellectual growth, but as, an engineer, I think it'd be 
irresponsible to choose Lisp for a large-scale project given the risks it
introduces.

Less is more (as long as "less" is sufficiently convenient).
