---
title: WWI
layout: post
published: false
---

I can't really understand 15 million of anything. If you asked me to visualize
15 million US dollars, I couldn't do it. People would be even harder.
Translating a single green, fungible cotton rectangle into my brother or mother
or father and then multiplying that by 15 million is completely unfathomable.

15 million people died in a war
over the course of 4 years, 3 months, and 2 weeks from 1914 to 1918. That
estimate [is
conservative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_wars_and_anthropogenic_disasters_by_death_toll#cite_note-14). 

I write that and, as I read it over and over again in a draft of this post, it
*feels* like it doesn't mean anything. It's a statistic that I'm unable to
visualize or weigh or *understand* in any real way; more than likely,
you feel similarly.

15 million people (many of them young men, but many of them also women and
infants) dead over that period of time means that 9,643 people passed every day
due to a violent action, or consequences of violent action. I can't even
really understand 9,643 either, but from a fatality perspective it translates
to three 9/11s every day for more than four years. About 7 large high schools
per day *gone* if you assume 1300 students per school.

You could pick any number of things that are mind-boggling about this figure,
this condition of history that at some point actually happened to actual
people, but there's one thing that confuses me more than any other. This
happened just 100 years ago. That's .05% of the length of time that humans have
been humans. In other words, if humanity was 45 years old today, we had WWI
(and 15 million people died violently) when we were 44.9775 years old.

It seems so recent. *How could that have happened so recently?*

Were people so different back then? Were they that much keener on tearing each
other apart? It doesn't really seem like it. They had electricity, running
water, newspapers, laundry, bars. This wasn't some global Sparta, just the
western world of 100 years ago. This was after Mark Twain introduced us to
Huckleberry Finn; after HDT sat on Walden pond; after Jane Austen's prim soap
opera, Pride and Prejudice. The civilizations painted in those works don't seem
bellicose.

Assuming things were that awful, how could we have changed so drastically
within such a relatively short span of time?

---

What scares me about World War I is that after listening to [12 harrowing
hours' worth of description and
analysis](http://www.dancarlin.com/product/hardcore-history-50-blueprint-for-armageddon-i/)
about it, I still can't understand why it happened. I mean, I understand the
sequence of events that led to French and British soldiers in one trench and
German in another, but I don't understand at any point what would compel, say,
a *town* of Germans to pick up and invade if left undisturbed by the order of
the capital. 

Near as I can tell, the whole thing was largely caused by the inhuman
machinations of politics. Borders, identities, pride, *nationalism*, the will
and whim of literal royalty (there were still kings then). Somehow I think that
if you asked any individual soldier in 1917 if he wanted to be fighting a war,
the answer would invariably have been "no." But the fighting went on.

In fact, on [Christmas Day](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christmas_truce) in
1914, German and British soldiers got out of their trenches, sang carols, and
played football with one another in one of the most miraculous displays of
humanity I've ever read about. These impromptu truces were not repeated widely
in later years "due to strongly worded orders from the high commands of both
sides prohibiting fraternisation."

Days later, the soldiers would be back in the trenches once again trying to
kill one another.

Imagine how many Teslas, Kafkas, Turings were wiped out arbitrarily. Heck,
setting aside celebrity: imagine how many *simply good people* were lost.

What would the world be like if they hadn't been erased or, at best, critically
wounded and psychologically marred? 

---

Some might think this an odd subject to broach. It may seem overly macabre or
even pathological to write about a horrifically deadly conflict that ended many
years ago. Why write about something so dismal, disheartening,
terrible, dark and then throw it up on social media?

I think at some point it's important for each of us to step back and
reflect on these things that happened not so long ago. Indeed WWI (to say
nothing of its younger brother) is easily on the top 10 list of human
tragedies, and it's not even something that was inflicted on us. This wasn't
the work of a supremely pissed-off mother nature, or some kind of vexed higher
force -- it was us. We killed 15 million of one another. And not that long ago.

How did we get there? What prevents us from getting there again? I hear
rhetoric from contemporary politicians around the world, shoving each other's
shoulders lightly like schoolboys, and once in a while I worry. How long do the
shoves stay light? Did the statesmen of 1914 really know how quickly and
irrevocably they'd wind up with the ghastly receipt of 15 million individual
lives?

Things are much better now than they were then, at least in the western 
world, and that's worth being happy about. But let's not regress.
