---
title: "Ignore the gurus (including me)"
layout: post
published: true
---

> Bodhisattva  
> Would you take me by the hand  
> Bodhisattva  
> Would you take me by the hand  
> Can you show me  
> The shine of your Japan  
> The sparkle of your China  
> Can you show me  
> Bodhisattva  
>
> *Steely Dan*

---


One of the unfortunate tendencies that the internet encourages is
outsourcing your decisions and beliefs. There is no shortage of fitness
experts, diet gurus, lifestyle designers, smug early-retirement stoics, and
armchair quarterbacks ready to turn you into a believer. Why? Simple: it's
never been easier for someone to present themselves as an established, credible
authority. The Wordpress blogs of today look like multi-thousand dollar
publications of 10 years ago. Distribution is, definitionally, a piece of cake:
rapid information sharing is what the internet was designed to do.  Humans, on
the other hand, haven't kept pace and aren't as good at making sense of such a
large volume of information.

I fall victim to this as much as anyone else. It's intoxicating to stumble
across some website that appears to have all the answers: a single guide you can
faithfully read and follow to achieve your
[health](http://marksdailyapple.com), [wealth](http://jlcollinsnh.com/),
[happiness](http://mrmoneymustache.com), jump shot, whatever. It's easy and
it's comfortable to listen to someone else tell you how it is.

I caught this in a big way with the paleo community. For two years, I uncritically
carried out everything that guys like Mark Sisson and Chris Kresser advocated:
a strict paleo diet, lots of heavy lifting and slow movement, standing desks,
meditation, coconut oil out the waz. After all, these guys were
well-researched, right? Every article was heaped with citations and publication
references. A heavy Google Scholar fetish cemented in my mind the legitimacy of
what these guys were saying.

And in most senses, they *were* right. My circulating cholesterol was awesome.
I looked great; probably was in the best physical shape of my life. Colds and
semi-yearly bronchitis became things of the past. But there was one factor that
swamped those benefits and more or less trashed my life: anxiety.

Of course, I went down the various guru-approved rabbit holes to try to combat the
anxiety: more meditation, caffeine abstinence, getting religious with salmon oil
and methylfolate supplementation, more heavy lifting. I even moved out of New
York City to get back to somewhere more "natural" (which, in all honesty,
probably *has* helped in the long run). 

None of this stuff knocked out the anxiety. The meditation was a definite help,
and moving out of NYC was probably the right move, but I was still plagued by
hypochondria, panic attacks, heart palpitations, head pressures, and a slew of
other bizarre symptoms: all worrying stuff, but classic markers of anxiety. 

Then I had a huge breakthrough; something that all the paleo gurus had
lampooned constantly and wailed against, citing the ills of "chronic cardio."
At the advice of a friend, I swapped out the heavy lifting for running:
old-fashioned vigorous cardio. To my surprise, many of the anxiety symptoms
abated within the first week that I started running for 30 minutes every other
day. The difference was dramatic. I was humbled.

The paleo gurus may have been right in advising against cardio for most people,
but for my particular situation it was a necessary move, and in
tunnel-visioning for two years, I'd ignored a solution that was obvious for
some.

Additionally, I brought back the caffeine, another no-no that turned out to be
helpful in lifting me out of the anxio-depressive hole. With it returned some of
the pep, energy, and optimism that makes me a person I actually kind of enjoy.

## First hand experience

I don't want to paint these guys in a completely negative light. Again, most of
what they advocated is good advice. I'm glad that I'm spending more time
outside, walking more, eating food that's less processed and closer to what my
body's genetically accustomed to fueling with. But I fell into a pitfall that I
think is a common trap: because these guys *mostly* made sense, I took their
word as gospel and stopped relying on my own instinct and experience.

These creative, critical muscles have to be maintained and flexed. As soon as
you stop examining lifestyle choices critically and on your own judgement, that
process calcifies and it becomes more difficult to think for yourself.
Ironically there's no quicker way to do this than to deluge yourself with other
people's opinions on how you should live --- something in no short supply on the internet. 

A part of me could feel that capability decaying, and as a result I lost
confidence in myself. Ayn Rand sort of referred to this condition as
secondhand living, and it's a very real thing in the internet age. For
people like me who are trained as engineers and always on the hunt for the
"optimal" solution, having a search engine and an RSS feed at hand is a
tantalizing and dangerous way to put your own mechanisms for exploration and
judgement in the passenger seat.

Another major pitfall is the religion of statistics. Many articles advocating
this diet or that exercise regimen are justified using this or that study,
which examined a population of people doing this or not doing that and drew a
conclusion based on average outcomes. 

Statistics is a great tool, but it's *just a tool* and it isn't ironclad.
Experiment design could have ignored any number of the infinite factors that
might make the findings irrelevant for a particular individual, just as my
severe anxiety made the plethora of studies advocating anaerobic (vs. aerobic)
exercise nearly irrelevant for the purpose of my overall health.

## The use of statistics and gurus

Just like statistics, these internet gurus are good tools if you keep in mind
the limit of their value. *Both statistics and blogs are excellent hypothesis
generators.* If you are convinced or even just intrigued by someone's argument
for a particular diet, lifestyle, or technique, the best thing you can do is
try it out with a neutral mindset for a while, then abandon it. See if it works
for your purposes *right now*, and in any case index it as another item in your
toolbox. For example, someday I will return to the heavy lifting as a way to
build muscle and bone density once my psychology cools off. It's just not the
right tool for the job facing me right now.

The difficulty is then not falling into cult worship that often accompanies
early success. Just because internet guru X was right about idea A doesn't mean
he's right about idea B; and even if he is right about idea B for most people,
that doesn't mean it's necessarily right for you. Of course, the natural
tendency is to cast a halo on blogger X and assume comfortably that you can follow
his lead, and that if idea B isn't working for you that you're somehow doing it
wrong. This anti-pattern is something that's been observed in people
[over and over again](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halo_effect).


## Innervoice

The title of this essay is incorrect. Don't ignore gurus (or me!), but be sure
to keep the self-help books, blogs, and vocally promiscuous "experts" in the
pantry alongside the sea salt. Develop your inner voice. Listen deep down
inside yourself. This is where the good stuff come from.  Even if you
make huge mistakes and rediscover the conventional wisdom that people were
pushing on you in the first place, that wisdom will be *yours* because you'll
have earned it.

When I gave up caffeine in an attempt to heal my anxiety by following other
people's advice, I sank into a depression. I think, though, that the depression
had been lying in wait and was only triggered by the lack of stimulants.
I'd turned my life into a set of constraints imposed by self-help material,
prescriptions for how to live life the "right" way. My spirit paid the price
for outsourcing judgement to other people. Luckily, I got a strong whiff of that
and decided that it was high time to stop paying so much attention to experts
and start trying things for myself. 

Self-help books, the internet, and statistics are great things for
hypothesis generation. But ultimately it's on you to test how well your life
tolerates and incorporates each practice. You're the only person that can do 
that, despite how easy the internet makes it to think otherwise. There is no
substitute for first-hand experience. Seek it out and listen to the results
with honesty and sensitivity.

What am I going to do? I'm going to stop spending so much time looking for
answers from the internet and play outside a little bit more. For now, I'm going to
mostly restrict my internet reading to trashy, funny nonsense that I know won't change
my life, lower my blood sugar, or optimize my sleep. I'm going to make more
decisions based on whim and do a little less thinking and worrying, and I'm
going to try to listen to myself. 

But I won't forget what I learned from the gurus.


<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oPh59jOoiEs" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

