---
title: Fasting for everything
layout: post
published: true
---

If you believe the premise that an occasional dietary fast is healthy, consider
applying the same concept to other things.

---

Abstaining from food allows the body to re-equilibrate, leaving various parts
of the body to attend to themselves and return to homeostasis. In the absence
of incoming energy,
[autophagy](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2990190/) prunes weak
and damaged cells, reducing the risk that they malfunction and cascade into
something more dangerous. Fasting is negative space for the body.

The National Institute on Aging (funded by the NIH)
[says](http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.2203/dose-response.14-028.Mattson):

> A major mechanism by which fasting can protect against tissue injury and
> disease is by activating adaptive cellular stress responses by hormesis-based
> processes. For example, IF [intermittent fasting] induces the expression of
> protein chaperones (e.g., heat-shock protein 70 and glucose-regulated protein
> 78) and stimulates autophagy in many cell types (Duan and Mattson, 1999; Yu
> and Mattson, 1999; Alirezaei et al., 2010; Arumugam et al., 2010; Lee and
> Notterpek, 2013). The latter actions of IF enhance the ability of cells to
> eliminate damaged proteins and organelles such as mitochondria. Indeed,
> autophagy is required for the maintenance of muscle mass (Masiero et al.,
> 2009), consistent with the preservation of muscle mass during IF (Harvie et
> al., 2010). Fasting decreases levels of circulating leptin and increases
> levels of adiponectin, changes associated with improved energy metabolism and
> cardioprotection (Wan et al., 2010; Hui et al., 2012). IF can also increase
> neurotrophic factor signaling in brain cells, which may contribute to its
> abilities to enhance hippocampal neurogenesis (Lee et al., 2002) and protect
> neurons against oxidative and metabolic stress in animal models of
> Parkinson’s disease (Duan and Mattson, 1999), Huntington’s disease (Duan et
> al., 2003), Alzheimer’s disease (Halagappa et al., 2007) and stroke (Yu and
> Mattson, 1999; Arumugam et al., 2010). 

I recommend giving the full paper a read.

It appeals to my intuition that this healing-in-absentia applies to more than
the health of a body. What about socialization? At the extreme, many of us
would go nuts starved of company. But wouldn’t an inundation of other people
provoke maladies reminiscent of too much food? Could we benefit from
occasional, extended periods away from other people? Would that allow our
intellectual and spiritual organelles the same kind of reprieve that
mitochondria get from a fast? Our minds might move closer to the roots of who
we are; the unaltered source of our personalities. Problematic extensions (that
we may not even be aware of) caused by influence from others might be stripped
away during the starvation of company. An exaggerated example: all your friends
might be alcoholics, and might push you in a similar direction.

This might apply to information too. This is news to nobody, but in 2016 we’re
avalanched by information. It’s commonplace for people to spend nearly every
waking moment intaking new facts, however minute and unrelated to actionable
parts of their life. It doesn’t seem out of the question that this constant
digestion of information might be analogous to uninterrupted snacking on candy
for most of the day. How can we maintain a cohesion strong enough to accomplish
mid- to longterm work when we have a constant stream of enticing miscellany
rolling in? Periodic information fasts (avoiding news sources, social media,
undirected browsing) may let our focus regrow. Maybe choosing to sit and listen
to a favorite album and stare at the drywall can be 100 times more meaningful
than spending the same time numbly scrolling through Twitter and getting riled
up about something you’ll never be able to change.

When we intake less information, don’t our minds become more sensitive,
receptive to new input when it *does* come? Maybe in order to hang on to the
things we really care about, we have to dial back input.

As [the guy who quit the internet for a
year](http://www.readability.com/articles/xyw9zya6) found out, there are
diminishing returns to a fast.

The things that we fast from probably aren’t inherently bad or good, but they
have certain effects, some of which may not be obvious. Removing those effects
for some period is to remove a variable, or at least hold it constant — it lets
us see what those effects are more clearly. This is a potential benefit
alongside any recuperation that may happen.

I think fasting is underapplied. Use it for caffeine, people, Twitter,
news, hot showers, food, work, music, email, warmth. Apply to anything potent.
Induce contrast.

And I’m not saying binges can’t be fun and illustrative...
