---
tags: fasting,health,ketosis,experiments
title: 5 day fast
id: 19-07-fast
pubdate: 2019-04-12 20:11:11.029 -0400
layout: post
---


Last week I did a five day "water" fast, although on some days I took black
coffee in the morning. This means, maybe obviously, that I didn't consume
anything for five days other than water, coffee, some salt, and a little
cocktail of 0 calorie unflavored electrolyte supplements. It wasn't bad, and
it's something I plan on doing at least once a year.

I've gotten a variety of responses when I tell people this. Most people have
heard of intermittent fasting, a milder form of the practice, which is all the
rage these days (and [for good
reason](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5388543/) IMHO). IF is
cool, but there are unique features of extended fasts that I think are really
compelling even above and beyond some kind of possible longevity benefit.

### Why did I do the fast?

Like I said, there's plenty of research to get excited about when it comes to
fasting, but if you're in want of citations I'll refer you to the
[resources](#resources) section below: many other people have condensed that
info more usefully and succinctly than I could, and I'm not necessarily here to
sell you on fasting.  Do your own research.

That said, a summary of the rationale goes like this: when you deprive your
body of exogenous energy (i.e. food), whether that's through exercise or not
eating, that energy has to come from somewhere. Your body preferentially burns
glucose because it burns quickly (which incidentally creates volatility in
energy levels, e.g. sugar highs) but glucose runs out pretty quickly. Once the
carbs stop flowing, the glucose stops burning[^1] and your body has to figure
something else out.

It then switches to something called lipolysis ([as opposed to
glycolysis](https://www.diapedia.org/metabolism-and-hormones/5105765817/metabolic-pathways))
which uses fat as a source of energy. Lipolysis burns more slowly and some
argue more cleanly (citation needed). When people talk about ketosis, this is
it: your body is being powered off fat which is slower and burns more steadily.
A lot of people report mental clarity, enhanced focus, more steady energy
levels, and reduced hunger.

So one of benefit of fasting is that you get into ketosis, cool. But the
benefits go beyond that.

I'm not a doctor (probably should have said this earlier eh), but my
understanding of cancer is that when cells [go through
mitosis](https://www.biology.iupui.edu/biocourses/N100H/ch8mitosis.html) (i.e.
single cell splits to form two new cells), transcription errors in DNA caused
by older, faultier cells lead to defective, "malicious" cells being created.
These bad cells reproduce as often as they can which creates a tumor, and
that's cancer.

During a fast, something kind of brutal and amazing happens: to generate
energy, your body starts to break down the older more defunct cells which are
then fed to younger cells to keep them going. This process is called autophagy
and there's a pretty good medical narrative (yet unproven though) that it may
prune out cells likely to cause cancer before they can be harmful. In my mind
this is a powerful enough mechanistic explanation to get my attention in a big
way.


But it doesn't even stop there. When you fast, your insulin and IGF-1 levels
drop because your body no longer has to route sugar from its bloodstream. This
apparently [kicks your stem cells into
gear](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1934590914001519)
which is maybe obviously *regenerative*. Researchers are using this fact to see
if mice undergoing chemotherapy are more resilient while fasting, and it looks
like they are:

> Multiple cycles of fasting abated the immunosuppression and mortality caused
> by chemotherapy and reversed age-dependent myeloid-bias in mice, in agreement
> with preliminary data on the protection of lymphocytes from chemotoxicity in
> fasting patients.

Damn.

I won't belabor the point, but there're more than enough hints here of
something profound from a preventative medicine standpoint to get me curious.

### Beyond longevity

I've [written before]({% post_url 2017-01-09-fasting %}) about fasting. Maybe
it's the latent Irish Catholic guilt in me, but I think there's something to
depriving yourself periodically of basic things to make sure you don't take
them for granted. A friend of mine pointed out that this makes Lent appealing
even from a secular standpoint. 

But anyway, New York has a way of inducing an unhealthy relationship with food.
Ever since I moved back to the city, nutritional prudence has taken a decided
backseat to the sheer glut of delicious food available, so I've developed a
kind of unhealthy relationship with food - consuming it as entertainment
instead of sustenance.

Beyond my city-specific woes, it's nice to really want something. I mean
*really* want something the way you want a slice of pizza after not eating for
four days. Desire that potent kind of resets your hedonic scale and, I dunno,
maybe it staves off depression or something.

I think there're a lot of spiritual arguments that could be made for a fast,
and so I guess it's no surprise the practice occurs widely in most major
religions.


### Setup

So how did I do it? Beyond just, ya know, not eating.

Well first I've gotta give credit where credit is due. This fast as thanks
almost entirely to a good friend out on the west coast, [Matt
Leggett](https://twitter.com/leggettmatt), who told me he planned to do a five
day fast and then I jumped on the bandwagon. It'd been on my todo for a few
months, but him pulling the trigger got me to commit. Matt's smart as hell and
a wizard with spreadsheets, so he rigged a Google form that reported restuls to
a Slack channel. This allowed us to not only track our bloodwork (glucose, ketones)
effortlessly but also shit talk each other about our bad numbers in real time
despite being on separate coasts.

We followed Peter Attia's method to some extent: eat a low carb ketogenic diet
two weeks before to get into metabolic shape. This makes adapting to no
food a heck of a lot easier because as anyone who's ever been hangry knows,
being carbohydrate-deprived without preparation can be painful. It's much
easier for your body to switch to eating itself when you've been burning fat
for a few weeks.

I was *mostly* compliant (ahem) but I wouldn't say I got into nutritional
ketosis. I was pricking my finger most days and doing bloodwork and I
apparently never got into ketosis.

![pre-fast bloodwork](/images/fast-pre.png)

My hypothesis here is that my understanding of keto involved eating too much
protein, which allowed gluconeogensis to kick in and have my liver turn the
extra protein into glucose.

I picked up some [electrolyte
supplements](https://shop.ketochow.xyz/collections/electrolytes). I'm not sure
if this is strictly necessary, but I wanted to be drinking a lot of water and I
heard it was easy to get deficient on potassium, magnesium, and sodium.


### The fast itself

#### Day 1

After an ill-advised Indian feast on Sunday night, 7/29, I stopped eating at
around 6:30p. I was in Virginia at the time and drove back up to New York the
next morning, having a cup of black coffee on the way. Personally the
combination of being fasted for ~12 hours and having a cup of coffee has an
incredibly euphoric effect on me, so I was feeling grand.

When I got to my office I worked pretty normally. At one point I was feeling a
little sluggish so I found an empty meeting room and did a few quick pushups
and got a quick hit of energy off of that. A few minutes afterwards though, I
fell into a malaise and entered a weird near-sleep state where I was nearly
dreaming with my eyes open. I went to sleep easily that night.

#### Day 2

The next day my glucose spiked to 96 - not sure what that was about, but it
didn't feel great. Having not tasted anything in 24 hours, the coffee I made at
work was remarkably delicious. The texture and detail of the cup was
indescribable - it felt like unexpectedly hearing wider frequencies of sound
from a favorite song you've heard a million times.

I was motivated to work and felt productive, though I got a few slight twingey
headaches in my left temple.

Later in the afternoon I went to the gym and did moderate squats (5x5 @
205lbs) and bent-over rows (5x8 @ 135lbs). The lifts felt heavy and I was
quickly spent on the rows, but the weight got moved. Aerobically I didn't feel
taxed at all.

I came home after work and completely vegged on the couch. In general I found
myself pretty useless in the evenings and allowed myself to embrace the
uselessness: after all, the important thing was not to eat. This in itself was
maybe kind of therapeutic.


![bloodwork during fast](/images/fast-during.png)


#### Day 3

I woke up at 4am on day 3 and it wasn't pleasant but it wasn't horrible. My
stomach felt somewhat uncomfortable but certainly not painful. Getting out of
bed had become an incredible chore - indeed being any kind of stationary made
me want to *stay* stationary in almost all cases, but once I got moving I felt
okay.

I found that in general early in the days I felt great, but that as the day
went on I became much more tired. Interestingly, walking around felt like the
most laborious thing - like walking through mud. Peter Attia also described
this, so it sounds like it may not just be me.

I went to the gym midday and did a reasonable set of deadlifts (3x5 @ 325) and
felt pretty good afterwards. Productivity at work was a wash, which is probably
explained by the fact that I didn't have any coffee that morning. Whether or
not I consumed coffee basically determined my ability to do anything with my
brain, but that may or may not be the case normally.

That night I woke up around 3AM feeling horrible, but I'd later find out that's
probably when my body finally hit a glucose+ketones low and I finally started
producing ketones en masse.

#### Day 4

I woke up, struggling to get out of bed, and measured my blood. Ketones were
bumpin' - finally! - at 3.8 mmol/L, so I was definitely in ketosis. That
morning I felt *really* good - exceedingly calm and focused. Who knows if that
was just placebo from being happy to see the numbers finally go in the right
direction.

My energy waned as the day went on, but I still felt pretty good. After work I
went and saw the new Quentin Tarantino flick, doing a lot of walking to and
from.

Up until that point in the fast, I hadn't thought as much about food as you
might think. But that night I started to fantasize about all the stuff I'd eat
after the fast was over - stuff I definitely don't normally eat like pizza.


#### Day 5

I woke up last day of the fast really dragging my wagon. I had a hard time
staying awake at work after jolting awake in the middle of the night.
The one saving grace of the day was a cup of coffee in the morning. By the
afternoon I was basically useless at work.

Walking felt continued to feel exceedingly difficult.


### Breaking the fast

As 6:30PM approached, I eagerly planned how I'd break the fast. Basically
everything I'd read told me to take it slow, and I'd find out that advice was
well warranted. 

In at least a token attempt to be prudent, I decided that at 6:30 I'd have half
an avocado and a single egg, wait a bit, and then walk over to my neighborhood
barbecue place to do a reserved gorging.

I started back from the office around 5:30p and basically sat on my couch
reading the manual for a drum machine until my phone's timer went off at 6:30.
I excitedly made the avocado and ate half the plate pretty quickly - delicious.
Like the coffee, there were dimensions of the avocado's taste that were new to
me in that moment. I quickly made the egg scrambled, salted it, and put it down
in about 30 seconds. Also amazing.

I set another timer and sat on the couch, just kind of zonked out and
digesting. 


### Conclusions

- not as bad as I thought, week went pretty quick
- doing it with other people is super helpful
- don't overeat on the way out
- don't do carbs for a week
- wrist better

- didn't enjoy coming back to food as much as i thought i would
  - made me realize how unhealthy my relationship with food is, how much i
    overeat


[^1]: Unless you're consuming a lot of protein in which case gluconeogensis
kicks in, but we can ignore that for now.

### Resources

- https://www.foundmyfitness.com/episodes
- https://podcastnotes.org/2019/04/04/zero-fasting-attia-1/
  - https://peterattiamd.com/ama02/
- https://peterattiamd.com/tomseyfried/
- Mark Sisson on Fasting: https://www.marksdailyapple.com/long-fasts-worth-the-risk/
- Pop-sci take on the metabolic theory of cancer: https://books.google.com/books/about/Tripping_Over_the_Truth.html?id=SH28oQEACAAJ&source=kp_book_description
