---
title: 2019 in review
layout: post
published: false
---

- Fixation with finance, economics, modern monetary theory


# Living

I started the year living in east Long Island City, in a year-old high rise on
the 28th floor. By all accounts it was a nice building, but to me it felt too
much like living in a hotel. Despite growing to like each of the doormen, I'm
not a doorman kind of guy. Whenever I'd pass by the sculpture garden or the
pool, it was hard to avoid the cynicism of pondering what kind of margin the
landlord is making on these showy accoutrements.

In May I moved to what I commonly describe as a "shitty 4th floor walkup" that
ended up saving me about a thousand bucks a month. I like this place and its
location a lot more than the high rise. In the last year I've pivoted from
thinking that floor-to-ceiling windows are the height of residential design to
being disillusioned with the cold expository feeling of not having walls.  

The new place feels more homey, down-to-earth, and it's on Vernon Blvd. in west
Long Island City. Vernon somehow feels like a small town, is full of plenty of
restaurants (notably my favorite: [Takumen](https://www.takumenlic.com/)), and
is a five minute walk from the water.

I'll be leaving this apartment in the next few months - more on that later.

# Working

I started the year at Chaincode and I'll be ending it there. The year for work
has been very mixed. While I've found reasonable success with my [assumeutxo
project](https://github.com/jamesob/assumeutxo-docs/tree/master/proposal) and
some minor adventures trying to speed up access to the UTXO cache, I feel that
my work ethic and morale have taken a serious dive. 

Working at Chaincode is sort of like trying to enter [the White
Lodge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_and_White_Lodges) - if you're not
completely pure of heart, you're going to get jacked up. What I mean is that
while it's a near-unbelievable haven for incubating work on Bitcoin, its
total lack of structure and surplus of freedom can be mentally debilitating for
those who aren't exceedingly self-motivated. 

The past two years have given me a crash course in the surprising factors that
actually motivate me (short-/mid-term value creation, meeting with people who
are relying on my work, semi-regular feedback from someone "above" me) vs. the
things I told myself motivate me. This is somewhat humbling because I always
thought of myself as being very self-directed. I think the reality is that I am
but only within certain constraints, and ones that involve semi-regular contact
with the people that I am doing things for.


# Nutrition


# Exercise
